A recurring theme, for example, in Chappel’s story is of seniors not wanting to retire. People being pressured to retire solely because of age is a problem, and ageism is a good label for it (although it’s worth noting that age-specific restrictions are far more common for young people than old ones, and minimum ages for voting, drinking alcohol, or hiring a rental car, say, mostly hold up in court). People not wanting to retire, however, because they cannot imagine who they are or how they can justify their existence to others without gainful employment? That’s just as big of a problem.

There are some signs of change on this front, although from wildly different corners: on the collective action side, young socialists’ and climate activists’ embrace of policies like the four-day workweek; and on the individual side, the surprising traction in recent years of the Financial Independence, Retire Early, or FIRE, movement. This subculture, which once seemed populated exclusively by thirtysomething techbros eating ramen in a shack to achieve a 70 percent savings rate and retire by 40, has now broadened to include more than a few women, people of color, single parents, teachers, and others outside the stereotypical demographic. For these people, cutting consumption drastically is worth it if they can ditch their boss a decade or more ahead of schedule and fill the time with family, friends, and passion projects instead. These surprising moments of resonance between the Green New Deal, the TradCath homesteaders, and the FIRE movement make you wonder whether Gen Xers and millennials across the political spectrum might be ready to rethink work-as-identity, as well as the consumerism that keeps the affluent wedded to work-as-identity.

The real problem with aging in the United States, for Chappel, isn’t ageism, but ableism. “A great deal of the anxiety about retirement income,” he writes, “is really an anxiety about retirement health: what will happen to me and my family if I need long-term care?” Medicare doesn’t address this: You have to run through your savings first and then get funding from Medicaid instead. Twentieth-century old-age pop culture didn’t address this: “the discussion of aging in the 1980s was about individualism and entrepreneurialism,” and many old people feared being lumped in with the “old-old,” i.e., the disabled. Not retiring isn’t an option either: You can only work as long as you are able.


Again, activists have presented appealing alternatives: turning senior centers into hubs complete with “meal delivery services, home health aides, and even end-of-life care.” But instead of facilitating the large-scale adoption of these models and recruiting “well-trained and well-paid” people to staff them, Chappel writes, policymakers leveraged “familial affection to solve a policy problem,” telling caregivers that “long-term care was a natural obligation of grown children, and one that their ancestors had done without complaint”—an ahistorical lie that has caused real damage. With a dearth of options, families that reach a breaking point have little choice but to put a parent in a nursing home they can’t really afford with staff who aren’t well paid. They often feel hideous about it—a problem exacerbated by the messaging around filial duty.

The answer to our current mess, Chappel argues, is inclusion: an old-age movement that includes the disabled rather than simply leaving people to hope they won’t become disabled; health care policies with fewer seams—maybe Medicare for All, and maybe with long-term care provisions; Social Security reform, not cuts; transportation that doesn’t depend on cars.

These are all good ideas. But there is another, related way out of this crisis: to sever the link in this country between paid work and the provision of a basic social safety net. Other countries have already done this, particularly via publicly funded health care. Yet America’s work fixation lies at the center of this entire narrative—an origin story for Social Security’s inequities and a fig leaf for attempts at privatization. Workism is closely tied to ableism, and is often deployed in political contexts for deeply racist purposes. It overlooks and stigmatizes unpaid caregiving, often performed by women, and drives the “welfare queen” stereotype, used by politicians to discredit the provision of public assistance to impoverished Black people. There’s considerable evidence that work requirements for food stamps exacerbate poverty. And the idea that only people who work really matter is exacerbating the cultural forces that drive many seniors to despair and cause elite seniors to cling to power.


Plenty of people are already starting to question the primacy of the career in defining identity: a form of identity that has always left a lot of people out, and that, in addition to subtly disparaging certain types of work, undervalues unpaid ways of spending our time that can be more fulfilling than we grow up hearing a career should be. Think hobbies, think childcare, think spending time with friends and family, think sleep. We don’t actually need to lead a national charge to unseat the primacy of work in the American mind, which has led so many affluent people to fear the emotional side of retirement even as the less-affluent fear the financial side. Lots of people are already trying to do that. But it would be easier for them to pursue those alternative visions of a worthwhile and balanced life if we stopped making access to good, cheap health insurance, 401(k)s, and Social Security dependent on full-time jobs at large companies.

Chappel closes his book with a moving image of senior citizens sitting on a beach guarding turtle eggs: “Sentinels watching over the precious life teeming underground, and watching, too, the children laughing.” It’s a role similar to one that Bill McKibben’s Third Act movement for climate action has imagined: seniors using their experience and influence to look out for the planet and for the next generation. It’s a powerful vision, but it only works at scale if we manage to separate meaning from market value—both when it comes to retirement, and when it comes to the worthy ways people might spend that retirement.