22 "Old People Habits" That Older Adults Get Teased About (Even Though I Do Several Of Them Too In My 30s)
BuzzFeed
Sat, July 13, 2024 at 11:16 AM GMT+8
9 min read


806
Yahoo is using AI to generate takeaways from this article. This means the info may not always match what's in the article. Reporting mistakes helps us improve the experience.
Generate Key Takeaways

When I was a kid, I thought that birdwatching with my Grandpa Bob was the most boring activity imaginable. But now, I'm pushing 40, and I recently started to get really excited when I see a cool bird. Since I'm beginning to enjoy more and more of my grandparents' favorite things, this Reddit thread of older adults sharing the "old people" stuff they get teased about made me smile. Here's what people had to say:

1."Massive font size on my phone."

Older woman with short gray hair in a blue top, sitting on a wooden bench, using a smartphone. Background: stone wall and window
—u/5krunner

"Yeah, my whole family teases me about this because I use the largest font possible, and it's actually called 'huge.' And I still have to have the phone in my face to see!"

—u/peepooh1

Blend Images - Mark Edward Atkin / Getty Images/Tetra images RF
More
2."My old guy white New Balance walking shoes."


—u/trripleplay

"I heard New Balance is cool now. My 15-year-old daughter has a pair and feels that they are cool."

—u/d-spornak

3."Going to the stores early in the day. Or going anywhere early, for that matter."

—u/blowawaydandelion

"You mean when no one else is there, the aisles are clear, and the store is stocked? Can’t imagine why."

—u/sqqueen2

4."Double spaces after periods. My coworkers don’t get it, and my boss had to tell them that I learned on typewriters."

An elderly person types on a vintage typewriter, showcasing time-honored writing techniques
—u/ambitious_row3006

"This is how I was taught in typing in the early '70s. I think times have changed, and we didn't get the memo."

—u/blowawaydandelion

Ziga Plahutar / Getty Images
More
5."At work, I've had to learn to stop using media references because they're all so old no one gets them. I remember my grandmother saying the world leaves you behind when you get old. Now I'm living it."

"I've gotten more sentimental. I'm moved to tears by happy things and sad things, and as a guy, that's not a good thing, especially in American society, where we're all supposed to be rugged individuals."

—u/dronedagain

"Sentimentality, especially in our male elders, is such a blessing. In my (early 40s, millennial) generation, expressing your emotions is a welcome blessing. I know the younger ones embrace it, too. Cry at movies, graduations, weddings, funerals, funny jokes, and all the in-betweens. I know you're still young-ish, but some of my fondest memories of my elders are their emotions, their laughter, their tears. It was rare when I was young, but I treasure those memories and it is more acceptable now. Be the helper now in your golden years. Make it safe and normal for the younger men in your life. PS I cry all the time."

—u/traechat

More in Lifestyle

15 Disrespectful Things People Do All The Time That Need To Be Stopped
BuzzFeed

Dear Abby: How do I tell my elderly, gambling-addicted aunt she can’t move in?
NY Post

Older Women Revealed The Subtle (And Not-So-Subtle) Signs Someone Will Be A Good Partner, And It's Eye-Opening
BuzzFeed

Here's What Happens When You Drink Coffee On An Empty Stomach, According To A Gastroenterologist
BuzzFeed
6."I get endless crap for driving like a little old lady by family, friends, and colleagues. It’s a running joke and well-deserved."

—u/jjbeeez

"I'm not old, and I still do that. The best kind of tea is safety."

—u/funkmasta8

7."The sounds that escape my body, especially when I'm getting up from a sitting position. The groan, the grunt, the joints popping. Thankfully, I don't have escaping gas like my grandpa had."

A man is sitting on a couch, holding his lower back in pain, while watching television. The photo implies he may have back discomfort or strain
—u/worried-alarm2144

"Yup, can't get up without sound effects. And needing to s.l.o.w.l.y stretch upright after sitting in the car for any length of time."

—u/nickalit

Ljupco / Getty Images
More
8."Early dinners and early bedtime, lol. If anyone invites me anywhere, they know I need to be home before dark! And what's with this meeting at 8 p.m. for dinner and drinks crap? Meet at 5 for happy hour. Cheap drinks and food, and you're home before 8!!"

—u/j68junebug

"Hah! Sounds like me and my husband. Of course, our problem is that we have always been on that schedule. Even in college, classes are over for the day, so go to happy hour, eat the free/cheap food, get home early, and get a good night's sleep. Life is good."

—u/francisann

9."Checking the weather app multiple times a day."

—u/beckstermcw

"Why is this an old person thing?"

—u/diablette

"Once you retire, it seems everything you want to do is predicated on the weather changing every hour. It literally makes no sense."

—u/beckstermcw

10."Birding."

A man and woman smiling during a hike; the man points ahead while the woman holds binoculars
—u/ok-share-3515

"Same here. Never cared that much about birds. Like, yeah, cool, they fly a lot of places and stuff, but now I'm like, OOH, WHAT TYPE OF BIRD IS THAT? I'LL HAVE TO LOOK THAT ONE UP. I'm 43 in a few months time."

—u/mazinfinity

Peopleimages / Getty Images
More
11."Cursive."

—u/babylon331

"It makes me so mad when I show my daughter something in cursive, and she says, 'can't read that.' I'm also ashamed of myself that I didn't teach her at home because I thought surely someone at school would eventually teach her. Nope. We don't even give an actual signature for things at the school anymore. I just type my name in."

—u/mis_chevious

12."Checking all my pockets before I leave the house. Keys, reading glasses, wallet, mask, lactaid pills... My wife teased me that I look like Peter Falk on the TV show Columbo. He's also the kindly Grandpa in The Princess Bride. And he checks his pockets at the end of the movie."

—u/ok-calligrapher-9854

"The fact that you had to explain who Peter Falk was in case people didn’t know made me feel old all on its own."

—u/doughboy1001

13."My 5-year-old great-granddaughter teases me about my iPod and wired earpieces. 'You listening for Martians?'"

Older woman with long white hair smiling, listening to music on an iPod with earphones, wind blowing her hair against a clear blue sky
—u/[deleted]

"I had a 20-something tease me for having wired earbuds back in 2006 or so. I told him that I never had to worry about losing one or whether they were charged. A couple of weeks later, he's complaining about how his earbuds were dead, and he forgot to bring his charger to the office. I roasted him, lol."

—u/garagequeen

Camille Tokerud Photography Inc / Getty Images
More
14."Being deaf. Lots of people seem to get a chuckle out of me not being able to understand what's being said around me. Not sure why pretending to speak but not making any sounds just so I have to go 'what?' is funny, but it happens more often than a normal person would think it would in an adult setting. It's not like wearing the wrong height socks around Gen Z; it's not something I chose to have happen and should be mocked for."

—u/visible_structure483

"I have hearing loss from ruptured ear drum, getting the bends ( commercial diver), and crane operator at a steel mill. Went to a hearing aid specialist. Invested in the best hearing aids available. It only cost me $1,000, and insurance picked up 80%. Best investment ever, except now I always hear my wife, I found a noise in my car that was always there, and it took me a day to figure out that clicking noise was my ankle when I walk. It was actually life-changing for me, and the really cool thing is they're Bluetooth so I get the phone, TV, and music right to my ears."

—u/no-effort6590

15."For being cheap and outdated. I’m never 'on trend,' and my retirement hobby has been selling crap online. My kitchen looks like a '70s time capsule. The youngsters think it’s 'cool'; my peers think it’s awful. Sold my Merry Mushroom collection and made a hefty penny."

"The rest of the house is circa 1980s/'90s. I had green shag carpets and fake wood panels into the late '90s/early ’00s and was teased for that. The bonus is that I’ve been able to sell a lot of my '70s, '80s, and '90s stuff to the kids on Depop. They eat it up, and I’m laughing all the way to the bank."

—u/historical_equal_110

16."Having a landline."

A vintage rotary telephone sits on a wooden surface with the receiver off the hook, near a window
—u/ilmd

"I'm 69 and will have a landline until I die. I insist that family members call me on the landline if they want to have an actual conversation. Otherwise, they can text me on my cell phone which will be in my charger with the ringer off. All of the shit that can be done with new cell phones, and they still haven't figured out how to improve the sound so it can be used as an actual TELEPHONE! I call that the emperor has no clothes!"

—u/procrastination_prez

Simpleimages / Getty Images
More
17."This is something my millennial children call me out on: I don't put on my seatbelt until I am finished backing up. I think it is from the old days of turning your head around, perhaps lifting yourself up a little with your right arm on the seat back next to you. Does anyone else do this, and if so, why?"

—u/mcliny

"I do this, too, while backing out of the garage because I need to turn my entire upper body just to look behind me. My neck barely turns as far as my shoulder these days."

—u/admirl_ossim06

18."Being friendly! I chat with people in line; I chat with service workers. I'm an introvert, but I like small talk. My family finds this strange."

—u/tangerinedream92064

"Ditto! I love talking to the cashiers. My wife will say it right in front of them. 'You know they don’t care. Why do you make their lives hell too?'"

—u/locustnation

19."I carry cash — apparently, that labels you as a dinosaur."

A person in a denim shirt is holding an open wallet and removing dollar bills
—u/albatrossno1629

"I had a younger friend that razzed me about spending cash. One day, we went to lunch and the card reader was down. Guess who she had to ask for money to pay for her salad?!?!? She never did it again!"

—u/still-a-kickin-1950

Pofuduk Images / Getty Images/iStockphoto
More
20."Including pointless details in stories and trying to remember the names of people involved in them, and my kids are just like, 'We don’t care who it was, we don’t know them anyway, get on with it.'"

—u/dj_licious

"Last Wednesday….or was it Thursday….no it was Wednesday because Tuesday was the day after I went to Walmart. Anyway, Wednesday I had to go to the other store…"

—u/nihilismmatterstmro

21."Borrowing CDs from the library."

—u/shrug-meh

"I taught 3 and 4-year-olds in preschool right when CDs became popular. I'd haul out the record player, and they all asked what it was. I started to feel old then, and now it's worse because all of my music is on CDs."

—u/evilmimiwv

22.And finally, "Actually, I get teased more for not acting my age. Them: 'You're too old for that.' Me: 'Hold my beer.'"

An older woman sits on a curb holding a phone with inline skates on her feet, smiling at the camera
—u/runner_one
